---
title: Game Companies are Not Your Friend
summary: ""
titleImage: /cb2077.jpg
titleImageCaption: "Zelda: Ocarina of time ran at a rock-solid 20 FPS. So...that 17 looks mighty low in 2020. Credits to digitalfoundary.net for the image"
shouldShowTableOfContents: true
shouldShowUpdatedAt: false
createdAt: "2020-12-16T00:00:00.140Z"
tags: 
  - Essay
  - Gaming
---

## Disclaimers
1. Do not direct any hatred at any employees of CDPR, or any of the other companies I mention in this post. 99% of the people that work at these companies likely just want to make good games.

2. With that said, buying these games because "you should feel sorry for the developers and support the industry" is simply perpetuating the problem and enabling these parasitic companies (i.e. EA, Activision-Blizzard) and the CEOs that infect them to continue exploiting passionate developers, artists, and designers. The very fact that the next Call Of Duty game sells a billion copies a year means that they can pay their highly-skilled, passionate developers 30k a year and work them 80 hours a week.

3. This post is not outrage bait to hate on CDPR or Cyberpunk 2077. Please read the entire post before dismissing it as such.

## The Context
Ostenisbly, this post is about Cyberpunk 2077: if you've been out of the gaming loop for the past couple of weeks, you may have missed that the game's launch since December 10th has *absolute mess* (on consoles, anyway). Additionally, the way that CD Projekt Red (henceforth CDPR), the game's developer, has handled its development has disappointed and confused many people, especially those that had purchased and enjoyed The Witcher 3.

To my knowledge (I'm not a "game journo" so I don't have the inside scoopz), below is a rough timeline of important points and events concerning CDPR and the development of Cyperpunk 2077:

- Riding high from the success of The Witcher 3, beloved developer CDPR bragged on multiple occasions that their hip game dev studio [doesn't force their employees to "crunch"](https://kotaku.com/cd-projekt-red-boss-again-promises-that-cyberpunk-devs-1835518344), which is a cutesy name for the cruel practice of forcing mandatory, grueling overtime on their employees. It's common in the gaming industry.
- Cyberpunk 2077, being in development for [roughly 9 years](https://www.gfinityesports.com/article/8658/cyberpunk-2077-how-long-has-it-been-in-development-9-years), was set to release in August 2020, but then delayed to September, then to November.  The game was once again delayed to December, and in order to meet this deadline, [the studio went back on their word and forced their company into "crunch time"](https://www.rockpapershotgun.com/2020/09/30/cyberpunk-2077-devs-backtrack-on-no-mandatory-crunch-stance-report-claims/). Oops.
- Game review outlets [weren't allowed](https://twitter.com/skillupyt/status/1335999301382639618?lang=en) to use their own footage when writing reviews, and only PC copies of the game were sent to reviewers, despite the fact that [41% of the game's pre-orders were for consoles](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/14/technology/cyberpunk-2077-refund.html), a metric the studio was surely aware of since pre-order statistics were likely similar. Many, many mainstream game review publications (IGN, gamespot) didn't do *nearly* enough to highlight this fact in their reviews, and showered the game with 9's and 10's.
- [Metacritic](https://www.metacritic.com/), ever complicit in the vicious cycle of game industry/advertising corruption, listed Cyberpunk 2077 as having a 91 out of 100 in the Xbox and PS4 section at the time. This has since been changed, but the damage had been done.
- Unsurprisingly, the game was released in an [absolutely unacceptable state](https://gadgets.ndtv.com/games/reviews/cyberpunk-2077-review-ps4-xbox-one-price-size-gameplay-2338569) on PS4 and Xbox One, despite those consoles being the initial primary targets for development. Surprisingly, the game also runs [pretty terribly](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mVWJPYKCMco) on PS4 Pro and Xbox One X, as well. The game runs OK-ish on PC, as long as you have great hardware.
- CD Projekt Red [apologizes](https://www.pcmag.com/news/cd-projekt-red-offers-apology-and-refunds-for-cyberpunk-2077) "for not showing you the game on base last-gen consoles". In other words, they're sorry for intentionally deceiving 41% of their customers, and getting blasted on the internet for it. They also have the nerve to call PS4/XO "last-gen" when the new consoles released just last month, and it's almost impossible to purchase a PS5 or Xbox Series X (they are sold out literally everywhere at the moment, except for absurdly high prices on amazon/ebay)
- In a move that should be illegal, but for some reason isn't, Microsoft and Sony are [refusing refunds](https://www.t3.com/us/news/cyberpunk-2077-ps4-and-xbox-players-fuming-as-sony-and-microsoft-refuse-refunds_) for the game, telling players to wait for patches. Patches that no one even knows what they'll contain or what they'll address. **UPDATE: in a rare win for the consumer, both companies are now offering refunds. This is likely to avoid legal scrutiny for not allowing digital refunds for all products, period, but a win is a win, I suppose**.

I think that covers most of it. If you can't tell, I don't quite buy the sincerity of their apology, nor do I think that this long list of mistakes can be boiled down to "aww shucks, guys, we really messed up! We'll strive to do better for our passionate fans next time!" 

Rather, I think that every single step that CDPR took was cold, calculating, and extractive, trying to exploit their employees and consumers as much as possible without caring whether or not their employees were well taken care of, or whether they could put out a product that they could confidently stand behind. Put simply, CDPR simply tried to cash a huge consumer-goodwill check, and that check bounced.

## From "Good Guy CDPR" To Bad Guy 
As I said above, at the surface, this post is about Cyberpunk 2077, but when you think about the gaming industry, the long bullet-point list above *is really nothing new*. Remember how badly we all hated (or currently hate) EA? Or Ubisoft? Or Activision-Blizzard? These companies' reputations have all been tarnished for similar reasons: they have abused the trust and goodwill of their customers by releasing buggy, broken, unfinished, or otherwise unrepresentative games.

With that said, then why has the internet's reaction to CDPR and Cyberpunk 2077 been so *visceral* and *emotional*? What makes this different from a typical EA or Activision-Blizzard blunder?

I think that the difference lies in **brand perception**. It's worth noting that companies spend millions of dollars in advertising to establish something known as a ["Brand Image"](https://www.qualtrics.com/blog/brand-image/), which is a term to describe how consumers associate ideas, feelings, and imagery to a brand. Getting this right is extremely important for the long-term success of a company. 

For example, what do you think of when I say "Activision-Blizzard"? For me, I see vivid imagery of landfills, cocaine, casinos, economic crisis, and depression. And that's probably not what Activision-Blizzard wants to hear, but their actions over the years have cultivated those images in my head, so they've kinda dug their own grave on that one.

CDPR, on the other hand, through sheer hard work and dedication to their craft ([and maybe some help](https://wccftech.com/cd-projekt-red-gets-7-million-government/) from the Polish goverment), had managed to cultivate a much more positive brand image. If we were to repeat that brand-word-association exercise with CDPR before the release of Cyberpunk 2077, I'd imagine that the words that most gamers would come up with would be much more positive.

Therefore, CDPR and the release of Cyberpunk 2077 has made waves across the game industry not because "game company does scummy, anti-consumer thing" is newsworthy, but because CDPR had previously been perceived as "one of the good guys" among the faceless, soulless, and spineless EAs, Blizzards, and Ubisofts of the industry. If Cyberpunk 2077 were to be developed by EA, for example, most gamers would simply roll their eyes and cluck their tongues, chastising the young and naive for buying into the hype. But this was *CDPR*. They were *one of us*. I imagine that, for long time fans of the studio, Cyberpunk 2077's blunder felt like a deep betrayal from a long time friend.

So, why had CDPR been perceived as "one of the good guys" in the gaming industry?

Perhaps owing to its humble beginnings as a small Polish studio, CD Projekt Red managed to cement itself in the minds of gamers as a passionate, focused, and honest game company. To be fair to CD Projekt Red, that may be true for the majority of people working at that company. I have not personally played any of the games from The Witcher series, but I *do* know from second-hand accounts that The Witcher 3 is an amazing game, it has enjoyed a plethora of content updates, and has been continuously supported by the company for many years, which is in stark contrast to many mainstream titles where the devs simply go dark after a few years until the playerbase dwindles into nothing. 

And while The Witcher 1 and The Witcher 2 may not have been as successful, those that have played those games typically regard them as flawed-but-enjoyable experiences which exude passion and care. The mere fact that CDPR put out three entries in the series that took three games to find success is a testament of their dedication to the world and its characters that they've created.

But on December 10th, and then repeatedly after, CDPR learned a hard lesson: **customer trust is very difficult to earn, but very easy to lose**.

For some reason, whoever is calling the shots over at CDPR must have slept through this class at whatever business school they went to, because this lesson is not new or difficult to understand, especially in the gaming industry. There are *many* examples of game companies going from beloved to hated, literally in the span of one game release: Bethesda (Fallout 76), Bioware (Mass Effect: Andromeda, or arguably, Mass Effect 3), Hello Games (No Man's Sky), Blizzard (the Diablo: Immortal Fiasco, or the Warcraft III fiasco), Bungie (Destiny). Gamers are passionate, excitable, fickle, and eager. They are quick to buy into hype, but they are also quick to write off a company completely when they've been burned. 

And it seems that many are feeling burned by Cyberpunk's release, at least on consoles. And to be honest, I don't think anyone can argue that the release of Cyberpunk 2077 was an abuse of trust. Console gamers were promised an amazing, high-quality experience from an "honest", "passionate", "focused" developer that they could trust, but instead got a buggy, poorly-optimized, mess of a game. More importantly, they were deceived up until the launch date about the game's performance on consoles. If CDPR had been more upfront about the game's console-specific issues, or had delayed the console's release while launching on PC, things may had been different.

Time will tell us if CDPR's brand image survives this ordeal, but the sentiment that I've gleaned from comments online tells me that fans will be much more discerning and critical of the company in the future. And there's no one that CDPR can blame but themselves. They've gone from good guy to bad guy in the span of a few weeks.

## Game Companies are Not Your Friends
CDPR, despite being the most topical example of betraying their friendly, hip, "good guy" image, is definitely not the first "good guy" company to get caught participating in some nasty, anti-consumer practices, shifting gamers' perception of the company permanently.

### Nintendo
As an avid Nintendo fanboy, it really pains me to say this, but despite what you might think, Nintendo is not your friend. Despite their kid-friendly appearance and their ["Fun First"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FdxEUL18ySY) attitude, Nintendo is extremely legally-aggressive, and has been known to be consumer-hostile:
* Nintendo [shut down](https://www.theverge.com/2020/11/20/21579392/nintendo-big-house-super-smash-bros-melee-tournament-slippi-cease-desist) a Super Smash Brother Melee tournament because it featured a mod that allowed people to play the game online, even though it was originally an offline-only game. There's currently no way to purchase this game from Nintendo, and due to the pandemic, there's no safe way to play this game in person. Therefore, in my opinion, this tournament was a great way for the Melee community to get together in light of this horrible COVID-19 pandemic. Nintendo's response? We don't care, shut it down.
* Nintendo recently released Super Mario 3D All Stars, which they are going to pull from physical **and digital** storefronts in March 2021, using [FOMO](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fear_of_missing_out) to drive sales for an otherwise bland and barebones $60 collection of old games (Super Mario Galaxy is amazing, though). Their explanation as to *why* they are doing this? ["Because it's celebration of Mario's 35th birthday"](https://www.polygon.com/2020/12/17/22180318/nintendo-removing-mario-games-35-anniversary). Yeah, I don't buy it, either.
* Nintendo has [tried, tried, and tried](https://www.nintendoenthusiast.com/nintendo-vs-emulation-difficulty-archiving-games/) to go after emulators, even at one point calling emulators themselves "illegal" (they have since taken this page down, so you'll have to take my word for it), which is blatently false. Emulation is crucial for video game preservation, and has been continuously upheld by U.S. law as being [completely legal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Video_game_console_emulator#United_States). Obviously, downloading roms is illegal, even if you own a copy, but emulation itself is protected, despite what Nintendo wants you to think.

### Valve
In the early 2000's, Valve earned a ton of good guy points for releasing great games (Half Life, Team Fortress, Portal, etc), and also having a nerdy, frank, personable face of the company, Gabe Newell (and I use the term "nerd" endearingly, as a nerd myself). You'd see "Good Guy Gabe" memes crop up every now and again, and most gamers had a healthy amount of respect for the company. But over time, gamers' opinion Valve began to sour due to the following:
* Valve was extraordinarily late to offer refunds on Steam, their digital PC game storefront, only doing so [because they were legally required to do so](https://arstechnica.com/gaming/2015/06/valve-begins-offering-refunds-for-all-steam-games/).
* Vavle will essentially nuke your account if you initiate a credit card chargeback for any reason (i.e. you request a refund, they deny it, you're still unhappy with your purchase because the game is broken). From what I've read, your account could be permanently banned, which means you lose access to literally everything you've bought on steam (I guess a more appropriate term would be "rented").
* Even in 2020, Valve collects 30% of revenue from every game sold on steam. [Many argue](https://www.polygon.com/2017/5/16/15622366/valve-gabe-newell-sales-origin-destructive) that this is a result of Valve exploiting their monopoly position for being the biggest PC game storefront in town (the Epic Store and GOG exist, but they are downright tiny in comparison to Steam). Apple has been catching flak for a similar reason, and [they had lowered their cut to 15%](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/08/14/technology/apple-app-store-epic-games-fortnite.html) for small developers due to public pressure. One could argue that Valve could easily afford to lower their cut, as well.
* In general, Valve stopped making polished single player experiences, which were responsible for establishing the company as a respectable, passionate game company in the minds of gamers in the first place. Instead, after Portal 2, they tried to chase micro-transaction whales with both DOTA 2 and Artifact, and most gamers rightfully saw this shift in priorities as disrespectful to their long-time customers and a misguided decision. Thankfully, someone at Valve realized that their whole brand image hinged upon making good single player games, so they released Half Life: Alyx. Hopefully, this is a sign that they are turning things around.

I've brought your attention to these two companies because I've been personally disillusioned by their actions over the years: when I was younger, I held both of these companies in very high regard, but now, my expectations are much more tempered and I usually wait for reviews (from real people, not sites like Polygon, IGN, etc) before purchasing games from them. But I'm sure that you can come up with your own examples of companies that used to be "that one game studio" that you'd always trust, and now you don't. For many of my friends, Blizzard is one such company. For my siblings, Bungie is another example.

It's sad, in a way: all it takes is one monumentally selfish and deceitful decision from these game companies to permanently piss off a huge chunk of their loyal fans. But like I said above, the flip side of that coin is that if these companies play their cards right, they will have a customer base that will actually *purchase their products in droves before they even come out*. When you think about it, not many industries have customers that are this passionate and frenzied about their products.

## Long-term Goals Vs Short Term Profits
With all of that said, why are companies consistently making mistakes that betray the trust that their customers have given them? Why are they throwing away their perceived "good guy" brand images so quickly and easily, when it's taken many of them years, or even decades, to cultivate?

The simple answer would be that game companies simply don't care what gamers think, since outrage on the internet typically isn't representative of overall customer sentiment Plus, people love to bitch and moan on the internet, but at the end of the day, they'll buy the latest AAA game like everyone else, right?. If you're old enough, you might remember the infamous [Call of Duty Boycott](https://knowyourmeme.com/photos/973082-call-of-duty), where most members of the Steam list were found to be playing the game on launch day, anyway. Gamer outrage on the internet is typically shortlived and meaningless, so I wouldn't blame game companies if they simply ignored it.

But I'm not so sure I agree with that argument: negative gamer sentiment *has* been shown to have a significant impact on a game's financial success. For example, EA's Battlefront II in 2017 outraged many with it's **outright-disgusting implementation of the lootbox system (i.e. gambling) in a starwars game designed for children, released during the holiday season**. After facing significant backlash that even managed to reach mainstream media outlets like CNN and Fox News, they had this to say:

<info-box :source-name="'Tweet from EA\'s official Twitter Account'" :source-link="'https://twitter.com/EAStarWars/status/931332890717143040'">
It's clear that many of you feel there are still challenges in the design. We've heard the concerns about potentially giving players unfair advantages. And we've heard that this is overshadowing an otherwise great game. This was never our intention. Sorry we didn't get this right. We hear you loud and clear, so we're turning off all in-game purchases. We will now spend more time listening, adjusting, balancing, and tuning.
</info-box>

I don't have the numbers to back this up, but there's *no way* that EA would have turned off microtransactions for a **children's starwars game, released during christmas** unless they determined that the negative sentiment from gamers would have a significant long-term impact on their game and on their brand in general. Seriously, if all had gone according to plan, they could have made a *killing* off of this game, especially with how predatory the microtransaction model had been designed. Instead, at the last minute, they determined that the negative backlash was more important to address. That decision alone suggests that companies *do* care what gamers think, and that negative sentiment *does* have a significant financial impact on gaming companies.

Instead, I think that companies make these kinds of consumer-hostile decisions because of a fundamental dissonance that affects many medium-to large game development companies: **the conflict between short-term gains versus long-term financial stability.**

That's not a profound statement (I am not a profound man), but to be clear, let me elaborate on it, as I don't think that you can boil it down to "companies that focus on short term gains are stupid!!". Instead, I think it's more nuanced than that, as both mindsets have value:
* **Short-Term Gain:** allows companies to remain agile (i.e. shifting focuses into new products, product segments, etc). Allows them to acquire talent quickly, gives companies a short-term safety net in the event of a financial hardship. Short-term gains are often more difficult to acquire, however, and often require riskier decisions to be made. May also damage brand image if these decisions don't work out.
* **Long-Term Stability:** ensures that the company has steady cash flow. Attracts the best talent (top talent can demand contracts that have stability and benefits built-in) and builds the best kind of brand image. Focusing too much on stability, however, makes it difficult to adapt and pivot when the market changes.

While many companies across many industries must grapple with the problem of balancing those two mindsets, I think that the gaming industry in particular is uniquely affected by this conundrum because many of the people involved in the industry are genuinely passionate about making great games, and value long-term stability of their company above all else. If I can be crude for a bit, I'd imagine that most game devs *couldn't give a single fuck* about shareholders, quarterly reports, dividends, performance metrics, or all-hands meetings. They want to make great games, work for a great company that cares about them and their customers, and make a decent living while doing so.

I also think that the game industry is uniquely affected by this conflict because, perhaps more than any other industry on earth, the game industry is the one most associated with "fun". No other industry offers a $60 product that can offer 10's, 100's or even 1000's of hours of enjoyment, professional-level storytelling and acting, and cutting edge technology and graphics. As a result, more than any other industry, game customers (i.e. gamers) tend to get personally and emotionally attached to its products and the companies that sell them. Other industries would *kill* for a customer base as loyal, proud, and dedicated as gamers. 

But the flipside to this is that, because gamers can be so personally and emotionally involved in a company and its products, they can feel personally betrayed when that company makes decisions that are consumer-hostile. So it's especially important that game companies are aware that gamers tend to have an especially low tolerance for being mistreated.

Normally, this wouldn't be an issue because, as stated above, the people making games usually want to make good games. Sometimes it doesn't work out that way, but I think most gamers can tell the difference between a bad game and a dishonest, exploitative game, sold to deceive players into buying it. But the harsh reality is that the gaming industry is a [$159,000,000,000 industry](https://www.reuters.com/article/esports-business-gaming-revenues-idUSFLM8jkJMl). There's far too many people in this world that can't and won't let all of that potential money simply sit there, unearned. And so, (again, being crude), people that *couldn't give a single fuck* about making great games, nor about the long-term health of the industry or the companies they work for, enter the gaming industry with the intent of taking some of that money for themselves. Gaming is no longer your fun little obscure hobby, and it hasn't been that way for a long time. [It's a business, man](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Do3iJ6DWvpQ). 

As a result, for many medium-to-large game companies, these kinds of people tend to make many of the decisions, while the people who *just want to make good freaking games* go unheard and ignored. And unfortunately, the people that just want to make money don't care about the long-term health of the company, and don't understand what it means to be a gamer, nor what it means to be personally invested in a game, a franchise, or a game company. They've never stared in awe at the sheer absurdidty and magnificence at Super Smash Bros' Character Select Screen, and marveled at the possibility that they could now have Sonic, Mario, Ryu and Cloud Fight to the death. They've never felt the rush of escaping The Maw in a lone Warthog at the end of Halo, right before the time ran out. They don't have fond memories of Warcraft III LAN parties every weekend. I'm not saying that they're bad people, but there's obviously a disconnect between the people making the decisions, and the customers that they're supposed to be serving.

So, when it comes time to either ship a broken game and make huge short-term profits, or delay the game and protect the company's image, these outsiders miss this crucial point: there's an emotional attachment to these games and these companies that these management CEO types don't get. They cannot empathize with these gamers, so they fail to accurately assign the correct weight to betraying their customers. As a result, they usually make the wrong decisions. 

So in the case of CDPR and Cyberpunk, it's likely that the short-term voices won out over the long-term ones. The game needed to be out by christmas for what was I'm sure a much-needed cash-boost, and another delay would have likely been very costly. Therefore, the game came out despite being undercooked. But like I've been saying, CDPR failed to factor in the very-real, yet unquantifiable realities of the gaming industry: their customers had placed a trust in them, and a gaming industry "trust", for better or worse, is a stronger, more-frenzied trust than any other kind of consumer trust. By failing to factor this into their decision making, they made the wrong call of prioritizing short-term gain.

In general, I think that many of these kinds of missteps can be boiled down to companies erroneously focusing too heavily on short-term profits at the detriment of the long-term health of their company, failing to take into account that these missteps are *especially terrible* when it comes to gamers and the gaming industry. 

## The Solution
With all of this said, what do should we do when our favorite (or once-favorite) game companies betray our trust in some way? Despite what all of the jaded internet commenters on the internet say, I actually think that all of the outrage over Cyberpunk 2077 is a *good thing*. While it might feel cool to jeer at the outrage and think to yourself, "typical internet, always so outraged over everything. Relax, it's just a game", it's exactly that mentality that allows the *actually* evil companies like EA, Ubisoft, Activision-Blizzard, etc, to get away with their behavior in the first place. These companies' entire business model depends exactly upon gamers' apathy and jadedness. Otherwise, if more people knew how exploitative these companies were, both in how they operate and how gambling-like their games are, there's no way that their business models would pass legal scrutiny for long.

On the contrary, I think that all of this outrage serves as a yet another warning to CDPR and other game companies that the trust of your customers should not be taken lightly. If respected and nurtured, gamers will buy your products as soon as you announce them, no matter the cost. They will do this until the end of time, and be incredibly happy doing so. They will write about your games, they will talk about your games, they will try to convince their friends to purchase your games. They will be the customer that keeps on giving.

But if you betray this customer, they may never come back. On the contrary, they will post on the internet about it. They will complain to their friends and family about it. They will feel emotionally hurt, and actually hate what your company stands for.

Therefore, as consumers, we can use this to our advantage. I think the solution is to continue hammering companies like CDPR, EA, Activision-Blizzard, etc, letting them know that we see *through* them. Letting them know that we will *not* blindly buy their games. Letting them know that we *will* call them out when we feel disrespected and lied to. **Of course, I strongly mandate doing so in a respectful way**. You can accomplish this buy not buying their games, letting your displeasure be known via social media, and writing posts and comments (such as this one).

At the same time, when game companies make games and content you support, go out of your way to purchase that content. God forbid, if EA or Ubisoft ever puts out a game that's actually finished and isn't exploitative or manipulative in some way, let them know that. You can do so, again, by purchasing that game, and letting them know through the usual channels (social media, reddit, etc). 